---
title: "Kotlin Pitfalls: Compatibility"
lang: en
i18n_key: do-you-really-know-kotlin-compatibility
date: 2022-12-07 00:00:00
categories:
  - Computer Science
  - Kotlin
tags:
  - Kotlin
  - Compatibility
---

In the previous post [Kotlin Pitfalls: FunctionReference](/2022/12/03/do-you-really-know-kotlin-function/), I covered how to solve the compatibility issue caused by [FunctionReference](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/libraries/stdlib/jvm/runtime/kotlin/jvm/internal/FunctionReference.java) when upgrading Kotlin from 1.3 to 1.5. But that's far from the only compatibility issue in Kotlin. How do we address Kotlin's compatibility problems systematically?

## What Are Compatibility Issues

Software compatibility issues can be broadly divided into two categories: API compatibility and ABI compatibility.

### API (Application Programming Interface) Compatibility

In short, this is about interface-level compatibility, which itself falls into two subcategories:

#### API Deprecation

For example, Kotlin 1.5 deprecated the `String.toUpperCase()` API in favor of `String.uppercase()`. Although the API is deprecated, you can still use it -- the compiler will issue a warning but won't halt compilation.

#### API Removal

For example, JDK 11 removed the `Thread.destroy()` and `Thread.stop(Throwable)` APIs. If your project uses `Thread.destroy()`, upgrading to JDK 11 will break the build. You either find an alternative or rewrite the implementation.

### ABI (Application Binary Interface) Compatibility

In short, this is about binary-level compatibility. For languages running on the JVM, binary compatibility mainly concerns bytecode compatibility, which also has two subcategories:

#### JVM Bytecode Version Compatibility

A typical example is the `major version` of class files.

#### Language Runtime Version Compatibility

Some Kotlin language features are implemented at the compiler level. Different versions of the Kotlin compiler may implement things differently. While Kotlin developers all call the Kotlin standard library, the compiler generates additional bytecode and even classes to implement the syntactic sugar that makes Kotlin look elegant -- for instance, the ubiquitous `Function` types.

## The Real Headache

### Incompatible Bytecode

Remember the issue from [Kotlin Pitfalls: FunctionReference](/2022/12/03/do-you-really-know-kotlin-function/)?

```kotlin
fun f(fn: (Any) -> Unit) {}

fun ff() {
    f(::println)
}
```

If we compile the above code with `org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-gradle-plugin:1.5.31`, we get the following bytecode:

```
final synthetic class io/johnsonlee/kotlin/TestKt$ff$1 extends kotlin/jvm/internal/FunctionReferenceImpl implements kotlin/jvm/functions/Function1 {

  // access flags 0x0
  <init>()V
    ALOAD 0
    ICONST_1
    LDC Lkotlin/io/ConsoleKt;.class
    LDC "println"
    LDC "println(Ljava/lang/Object;)V"
    LDC 1
    INVOKESPECIAL kotlin/jvm/internal/FunctionReferenceImpl.<init> (ILjava/lang/Class;Ljava/lang/String;Ljava/lang/String;I)V
    RETURN
    MAXSTACK = 6
    MAXLOCALS = 1

}
```

The bytecode generated by the Kotlin compiler contains content that doesn't exist in older versions. As a result, other projects using Kotlin below 1.4 will encounter a `NoSuchMethodError` at runtime when they consume this bytecode.

### Incompatible Metadata

Beyond class bytecode, Kotlin also generates other binary content:

1. Metadata (`@Metadata`)
1. Module mapping (`*.kotlin_module`)
1. ......

All of these binary artifacts contain version information and version compatibility constraints.

Taking `@Metadata` as an example, the default compatibility strategy is that `x.y` is compatible with `x.{y + 1}`, unless versions have strict semantics.

So how are the version numbers for these binary artifacts determined?

#### Metadata Version

The `@Metadata` version is determined by the Kotlin Compiler version. For Gradle projects, this is effectively the *kotlin-gradle-plugin* version. Changing the *kotlin-gradle-plugin* version will affect the `@Metadata` version.

#### Module Mapping Version

The `*.kotlin_module` version is also determined by the Kotlin Compiler version and matches the `@Metadata` version. If there's a version incompatibility, compilation will fail with:

```
Module was compiled with an incompatible version of Kotlin. The binary version of its metadata is a.b.c, expected version is x.y.z.
```

## Java's Solution

Java has a systematic solution for compatibility issues. If you've used Gradle, you'll remember that Java compile tasks can be configured with these two parameters:

1. `sourceCompatibility`
1. `targetCompatibility`

For example:

```groovy
java {
    sourceCompatibility = JavaVersion.VERSION_1_8
    targetComaptibility = JavaVersion.VERSION_1_8
}
```

These correspond to the API and ABI levels mentioned earlier:

| #    | Java Compiler Options | Gradle Compiler Task Options |
|:----:|:---------------------:|:----------------------------:|
| API  | `-source`             | `sourceCompatibility`        |
| ABI  | `-target`             | `targetCompatibility`        |

## Kotlin's Solution

Kotlin also provides compiler options to specify versions:

| #    | Kotlin Compiler Options | Gradle Compiler Task Options |
|:----:|:-----------------------:|:----------------------------:|
| API  | `-api-version`          | `apiVersion`                 |
| ABI  | `-language-version`     | `languageVersion`            |

Usage:

```kotlin
tasks.withType<KotlinCompile> {
    kotlinOptions {
        apiVersion = "1.5"
        languageVersion = "1.5"
    }
}
```

Important notes:

1. `-api-version` cannot be greater than `-language-version`
1. Restricting `-language-version` implicitly restricts `-api-version` as well

The correspondence between Kotlin and Java compiler options:

| #    | Kotlin Compiler Options | Java Compiler Options |
|:----:|:-----------------------:|:---------------------:|
| API  | `-api-version`          | `-source`             |
| ABI  | `-language-version`     | `-target`             |

So Kotlin's compatibility management is just as straightforward as Java's. But how exactly should you use these two compiler options?

## Best Practices

### Unify the Kotlin Version

Your project's Kotlin version should ideally use `embeddedKotlinVersion` (the version of Kotlin embedded in Gradle). For example:

```kotlin
buildscript {
    repositories {
        mavenCentral()
        gradlePluginPortal()
    }
    dependencies {
        classpath("org.jetbrains.kotlin:kotlin-gradle-plugin:${embeddedKotlinVersion}")
    }
}
```

Or:

```kotlin
plugins {
    kotlin("jvm") version embeddedKotlinVersion
}
```

### Specify `-language-version` or `-api-version`

Using the [FunctionReference](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin/blob/master/libraries/stdlib/jvm/runtime/kotlin/jvm/internal/FunctionReference.java) issue as an example, our goal is backward compatibility at the bytecode level -- the ABI level. To ensure the generated bytecode doesn't contain content from Kotlin 1.4 (i.e., backward compatible with Kotlin 1.3), you can specify either `-language-version` or `-api-version`:

```kotlin
tasks.withType<KotlinCompile> {
    kotlinOptions {
        languageVersion = "1.3"
    }
}
```

Or:

```kotlin
tasks.withType<KotlinCompile> {
    kotlinOptions {
        apiVersion = "1.3"
    }
}
```

With either option, the compiled bytecode becomes:

```
io.johnsonlee.kotlin.TestKt$ff$1();
    descriptor: ()V
    flags: (0x0000)
    Code:
      stack=2, locals=1, args_size=1
         0: aload_0
         1: iconst_1
         2: invokespecial #57 // Method kotlin/jvm/internal/FunctionReference."<init>":(I)V
         5: return
```

Notice that the `FunctionReference` bytecode representation has changed.

Since both options work, what's the actual difference between `-language-version` and `-api-version`?

The difference is:

> Bytecode compiled with `-language-version` will have a `@Metadata` version of `1.1.18`, while bytecode compiled with `-api-version` will still have a `@Metadata` version of `1.5.1`.

This tells us that `-api-version` doesn't achieve full ABI-level compatibility. `-language-version` has a broader impact -- it not only restricts language features across versions but also constrains the versions of binary artifacts including metadata.

Although `-language-version` and `-api-version` affect the compiled bytecode content, they do not change the version of the Kotlin `stdlib` that your project depends on. Even with the 1.5 *kotlin-gradle-plugin*, if you set `-language-version` or `-api-version` to 1.3, the project's dependencies won't change. This is why Kotlin can achieve backward compatibility -- even when some APIs are disallowed in higher versions (e.g., `toLowerCase()` is disallowed from 1.5 onward), the API hasn't actually been removed. The compiler simply won't let you use it:

```kotlin
@DeprecatedSinceKotlin(
    warningSince = "1.3",
    errorSince = "1.5"
)
```

If a class has already been compiled with `-language-version="1.3"`, it will work perfectly fine with the 1.5 `stdlib`.
